=encoding UTF-8

=head1 NAME

tesh -- testing shell

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<tesh> [I<options>]... I<testsuite>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Tesh is the testing shell, a specialized shell for running tests. It
provides the specified input to the tested commands, and check that
they produce the expected output and return the expected value.

=head1 OPTIONS

  --help              : display help
  --cd some/directory : ask tesh to switch the working directory before
                        launching the tests
  --setenv var=value  : set a specific environment variable
  --cfg arg           : add parameter --cfg=arg to each command line
  --log arg           : add parameter --log=arg to each command line
  --ignore-jenkins    : ignore all cruft generated on SimGrid
                        continuous integration servers


=head1 TEST SUITE FILE SYTAX

A test suite is composed of one or several I<command blocks> separated
by empty lines, each of them being composed of a command to run, its
input text and the expected output.

The first char of each line specifies the type of line according to
the following list. The second char of each line is ignored.

 `$' command to run in foreground
 `&' command to run in background

 `<' input to pass to the command
 `>' output expected from the command

 `!' metacommand, which can be one of:
     `timeout' <integer>|no
     `expect signal' <signal name>[|<signal name>]*
     `expect return' <integer>
     `output' <ignore|display>
     `output sort' [integer]
     `setenv <key>=<val>'
     `ignore' <regexp>

 `p' an informative message to print
 `#' a comment

If the expected output do not match the produced output, or if the
command did not end as expected, Tesh provides an error message (see
the OUTPUT section below) and stops.

=head2 Command blocks examples

In a given command block, you can declare the command, its input and
its expected output in the order that you see fit.

    $ cat
    < TOTO
    > TOTO

    > TOTO
    $ cat
    < TOTO

    > TOTO
    < TOTO
    $ cat

You can group several commands together, provided that they don't have
any input nor output.

    $ mkdir testdir
    $ cd testdir

=head2 Enforcing the command return code

By default, Tesh enforces that the tested command returns 0. If not,
it fails with an appropriate message and returns I<code+40> itself.

You specify that a given command block is expected to return another
code as follows:

    # This command MUST return 42
    ! expect return 42
    $ sh -e "exit 42"

The I<expect return> construct applies only to the next command block.

=head2 Commands that are expected to raise signals

By default, Tesh detects when the command is killed by a signal (such
as SEGV on segfaults). This is usually unexpected and unfortunate. But
if not, you can specify that a given command block is expected to fail
with a signal as follows:

    # This command MUST raise a segfault
    ! expect signal SIGSEGV
    $ ./some_failing_code

The I<expect signal> construct applies only to the next command block.

=head2 Timeouts

By default, no command is allowed to run more than 10 seconds. You can
change this value as follows:

    # Allow some more time to the command
    ! timeout 60
    $ ./some_longer_command

You can also disable the timeout completely by passing "no" as a value:

    # This command will never timeout
    ! timeout no
    $ ./some_very_long_but_safe_command

=head2 Setting environment variables

You can modify the environment of the tested commands as follows:

    ! setenv PATH=/bin
    $ my_command

You can also set an envirmnent variable from the command line:

    tesh --setenv bindir=/opt/bin/

And then use it within the tesh file:

    $ ${bindir}/myprogram

Tesh also supports perl default value for undefined variables:

    $ ${bindir:=/usr/bin}/myprogram

=head2 Not enforcing the expected output 

By default, the commands output is matched against the one expected,
and an error is raised on discrepancy. Metacommands to change this:

=over 4

=item output ignore

The output is completely discarded.

=item output display

The output is displayed, but no error is issued if it differs from the
expected output.

=item output sort

The output and the expected output are sorted before comparison (see next section).

=back

=head2 Sorting output

If the order of the command output changes between runs, you want to
sort it before enforcing that it is exactly what you expect. In
SimGrid for example, this happens when parallel execution is
activated: User processes are run in parallel at each timestamp, and
the output is not reproducible anymore. Until you sort the lines.

You can sort the command output as follows:

    ! output sort
    $ ./some_multithreaded_command

Sorting lines this ways often makes the tesh output very intricate,
complicating the error analysis: the process logical order is defeated
by the lexicographical sort.

The solution is to prefix each line of your output with temporal
information so that lines can be grouped by timestamps. The
lexicographical sort then only applies to lines that occurred at the
same timestamp. Here is a SimGrid example:

    # Sort only lines depending on the first 19 chars
    ! output sort 19
    $ ./some_simgrid_simulator --log=root.fmt:[%10.6r]%e(%i:%P@%h)%e%m%n

This approach may seem surprizing at the first glance but it does its job:

=over 4

=item Every timestamps remain separated, as it should; 

=item In each timestamp, the output order of processes become
   reproducible: that's the lexicographical order of their name;

=item For each process, the order of its execution is preserved: its
   messages within a given timestamp are not reordered.

=back

That way, tesh can do its job (no false positive, no false negative)
despite the unpredictable order of executions of processes within a
timestamp, and reported errors remain easy to analyze (execution of a
given process preserved).

This example is very SimGrid oriented, but the feature could even be
usable by others, who knows?

=head2 Ignoring some output

Some outputed lines can be ignored by setting the ignore command followed
by a regular expression:

    ! ignore .*0x[0-9A-F]+\.
    $  printf 'word\nMemory address: 0x42AA42.\nanotherword\n'
    > word
    > anotherword


=head2 Colored and formatted text

Tesh removes ANSI/VT100 control sequences from outputed text to make easier the writing of tests.

    $ printf "I \033[0;31mlove\033[0m tesh\n"
    > I love tesh



=head1 BUILTIN COMMANDS

=head2 mkfile: creating a file

This command creates a file of the name provided as argument, and adds
the content it gets as input.

  $ mkfile myFile
  > some content
  > to the file

It is not possible to use the cat command, as one would expect,
because stream redirections are currently not implemented in Tesh.

=head1 BUGS, LIMITATIONS AND POSSIBLE IMPROVEMENTS

The main limitation is the lack of stream redirections in the commands
(">", "<" and "|" shell constructs and friends). The B<mkfile> builtin
command makes this situation bearable.

It would be nice if we could replace the tesh file completely with
command line flags when the output is not to be verified.


=cut
