.TH smpirun 1
.SH NAME
smpirun \- Allow the configuration and the execution of MPI programs with simgrid and SMPI
.SH SYNOPSIS
smpirun [\fIOPTIONS\fR]… \fB\-platform\fR <platform.xml> \fB\-hostfile\fR <hostfile> program [\fIPROGRAM-OPTIONS\fR]…
.SH DESCRIPTION
smpirun provides an easy way to run programs linked to simgrid and using SMPI. It sets some default values, and generate a deployment file using the mandatory arguments \fB-platform\fR and \fB-hostfile\fR.
.TP
\fB\-platform\fR <platform.xml>
XML file describing the platform on which we want to deploy the program 
.TP
\fB\-hostfile\fR, \fB\-machinefile\fR <hostfile>
Hostfile listing all the machines in use
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Configuration options
The configuration of the simulation can be tweaked using \fB--cfg\fR=\fIparameter\fR:\fIvalue\fR. Refer to http://simgrid.gforge.inria.fr/simgrid/latest/doc/options.html to know what are the different possibilities.
.SS Other options
.TP
\fB\-help\fR
Print the usage and a résumé of the available options
.TP
\fB\-keep-temps\fR
Do not remove the generated files after execution.
.TP
\fB\-wrapper\fR <command>
Use command to run the program (e.g. "valgrind", "gdb --args", "rr record").
You usually want to use the "-foreground" option as well in order to have a TTY.
.TP
\fB\-foreground\fR
Run the child process in the foreground.
This gives the child process access to the TTY.
.TP
\fB\-map\fR
Display the machine on which each process rank is mapped.
.TP
\fB\-np\fR <numprocs>
Use that amount of processes. By default, there is the same number of processes as there are of hosts in the hostfile.
.TP
\fB\-trace\fR
Equivalent to \fB–cfg\fR=\fItracing\fR:\fIyes\fR \fB–cfg\fR=\fItracing/smpi\fR:\fIyes\fR, activate the trace mechanism if available.
.TP
\fB\-trace-ti\fR
Activate time independant tracing.
.TP
\fB\-trace-comment\fR <comment>
Put a comment on the top of the trace file.
.TP
\fB\-trace-comment-file\fR <file>
Insert the content of the file at the head of the trace file as a comment.
.TP
\fB\-trace-grouped\fR
Group MPI processes by location.
.TP
\fB\-trace-resource\fR
Trace resource utilization.
.TP
\fB\-trace-viva\fR
Generate configuration for Viva's GraphView.
.TP
\fB\-trace-file\fR <tracefile>
Name of the tracefile
.SH AUTHORS
The SimGrid team (simgrid-devel@lists.gforge.inria.fr)
.SH COPYRIGHT AND LICENCE
Copyright (c) 2014. The SimGrid Team. All rights reserved.

This program is free software; you may redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of GNU LGPL (v2.1) license.
.SH SEE ALSO
.B smpicc\fR(1)
.B smpicxx\fR(1)
.B smpiff\fR(1)
.B smpif90\fR(1)
